[SOUND] In this lecture we're
going to create a basic HTML document
structure by going straight to the editor
and coding one up ourselves and
then we'll validate it on
the w3c web validator site.
Okay so I'm in Sublime Text and
I have a document open a file
open called .-structure.before.HTML.
And it's located in the examples,
Lecture04 folder.
So we have a blank slate
in front of us and
we're going to create our
very first HTML page.
So every HTML page should start with
the doc type or document type declaration.
The words doc type or
HTML could be lower or upper case.
The only thing you have to watch out for
is that there shouldn't
be any space between less
than exclamation point and
the word doc type.
You can have as much space as
you want anywhere else but
it just doesn't look that great.
So we'll just keep it to one space.
In the past, these declaration were pretty
complicated looking, certainly not too
many people would be able to type
them up without copy and paste.
HTML 5 however changed all that.
Now the declaration is
as simple as it can be.
All it does is tell the browser that
it should get ready to render HTML.
Now I know what some of
you might be thinking.
What else would there be if not HTML?
There doesn't seem to be any practical
purpose for this declaration.
If you're thinking that,
you're absolute right.
This declaration is really
largely historical.
When HTML standards were
first becoming popular,
the web was full of pages that were
not compliant with the standards.
To help browsers render those pages
correctly, browsers used the doctype
declaration to distinguish between
noncompliant and compliant pages.
Noncompliant pages were rendered
in what's called the quirks mode,
and the compliant pages were rendered
in what's called the standards mode.
Now, that's all historical.
But what you need to know today is that if
you leave off the HTML page declaration,
that will signal to the browser
that it should treat your pages
as one not following HTML standard.
I'm not going to go into into what that
would actually mean in practice but
needless to say things
would be a bit messed up.
Your layout wouldn't work quite right.
The styles you apply would
work a bit well quirky.
So to make a long story short always use
the simple HTML5 doctype declaration.
Next, goes the html tag,
and that's basically a tag that
contains the entire html document.
After the html tag, goes the head tag.
The head tag contains items that
describe the main content of the page.
Things like what character coding should
the browser use for the main content.
It can contain authors description of
the page, page title, and whatever other
external resources are needed to render
the page properly, among other things.
The point is it contains some
metadata about the main content.
Let's write our first metatag to
specify the character set in coding
of our webpage.
While not absolutely required, it's always
a good idea to specify the character set
that the browser should know how to
interpret the content of the webpage.
The most commonly used
character set is UTF 8.
Also note that the meta
tag is a stand alone tag.
There is no closing meta tag.
Next we'll specify the title of the page.
The title is one of the tags that
is actually required to be here.
Without it, the HTML will be invalid.
After the head tag goes the body tag.
The body tag is the root of all
content that is visible to the user.
It is often referred to as a viewport.
We can now write our content.
Okay, so let's take a look at
how this looks in the browser.
Okay, and here's our page.
Let's see the content.
Coursera is so cool.
I'm learning so much.
And you could see that the title,
Coursera is Cool, is also there.
Next, let's try to take the code
from our page, and copy and
paste it to validate it
inside the W3C validator.
And it says we're valid.
I'm sure you've noticed by now that what
we're doing is nesting one HTML tag into
another.
So for example, we could say that
the head tag contains the title tag.
One important rule when nesting
html tags is that you have to
close the last opened tag before
you close its parent tag.
If you don't,
the html you wrote is invalid.
So for example here I have a paragraph.
And don't worry about what these tags mean
at the moment, but the paragraph tag, p,
is closed before the last open tag, span.
Span is close after.
So if we copy and paste this code and
place it inside our validator and
check it,
you will see that it's complaining, and
saying that, the end tag p seen,
but there were open elements.
In other words, it wants us to close
the span tag, which was opened last,
before we close the outer,
p paragraph tag.
One more note before we move on.
When the browser opens an HTML page.
It always renders or interprets the HTML
code sequentially from top to bottom.
So the doctype declaration gets
interpreted first, then the HTML tag,
then the head tag, and on and on until
it hits the last closing HTML tag.
This'll be important to remember as
we progress further into the course.
In summary, we went over the bare
minimum HTML document plus weighted sum.
We went over the HTML version declaration.
And remember, we always have to use it,
otherwise the browser will be put into
quirks mode and some things will break.
Our first HTML tags.
We used html, meta, head, title, body, and
actually throw in some
paragraph tags as well.
We went over the fact that HTML is
rendered by the browser sequentially,
meaning top to bottom.
And it renders it top to bottom as well.
Next, we're going to talk
about HTML content models.